

Venezuela's leader takes aim at US President Bush, calling him 'the devil'
Associated Press International
September 20, 2006 Wednesday 9:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1303 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez called U.S. President George W. Bush "the devil" in a speech to the United Nations on Wednesday, accusing Washington of imposing its will on the world through wars in places from Iraq to Lebanon.
The impassioned speech by the leftist leader, one of the Bush's staunchest critics, focused on what he called a pressing need to confront an emerging "world dictatorship" led by the U.S.
"The devil came here yesterday," Chavez said, referring to Bush's address on Tuesday and making the sign of the cross. He added that the podium "smells of sulfur still today."
"Yesterday, ladies and gentlemen... the president of the United States, the gentleman to whom I refer as the devil, came here, talking as if he owned the world," Chavez said.
Chavez's diatribe reflected the difficulty Bush faces in his key mission at the U.N. convincing a largely skeptical world audience that his administration's fight against terrorism was not one targeting Muslims.
Chavez's words drew tentative giggles at times from the audience, but also some applause when he called Bush the devil.
U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Chavez's remark was "not becoming for a head of state."
"I am not going to dignify a comment by the Venezuelan president to the president of the United States," Rice told reporters in New York. The main U.S. seat in the assembly hall was empty as Chavez spoke, though the U.S. Ambassador John Bolton told The Associated press that there was a "junior note-taker" there, as is customary "when governments like that speak."
Chavez also called Bush a "spokesman of imperialism" who was trying "to preserve the current pattern of domination, exploitation and pillage of the peoples of the world."
"An Alfred Hitchcock movie could use it as a scenario. I would even propose a title: 'The Devil's Recipe,'" Chavez said.
He accused the U.S. of planning and financing a failed 2002 coup against him, a charge the U.S. denies. And he said the U.S. tries to impose its vision of democracy militarily in countries like Iraq.
"We appeal to the people of the United States and the world to halt this threat, which is like a sword hanging over our head," he said,
"The imperialists see extremists everywhere. It's not that we are extremists. It's that the world is waking up," Chavez said.
At the start of his talk, which lasted 23 minutes, Chavez held up a book by American writer Noam Chomsky, "Hegemony or Survival: America's Quest for Global Dominance," and recommended it to everyone in the General Assembly, as well as to the American people.
"The people of the United States should read this... instead of the watching Superman movies," Chavez told reporters later who packed into a news conference.
He also called U.S. consumerism "madness," saying Americans have wasteful habits in using oil and energy. He held up a satellite photo showing the world at night, with bright light emanating from the U.S. and other wealthy countries.
Consuming less should be an environmental priority, he said, "instead of looking for oil" through the war in Iraq.
His fiery speech came a day after Bush and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, in separate speeches, sparred over Tehran's disputed nuclear program. Chavez has stood by Iran in the nuclear dispute, saying it has a right to develop nuclear energy and is not making a bomb as the U.S. and its allies allege.
Chavez also lambasted the U.S. government for trying to block Venezuela's campaign for a seat in the U.N. Security Council. He said if chosen over U.S.-favorite Guatemala in a secret-ballot U.N. vote next month, Venezuela would be "the voice of the Third World."
The council is made up of five permanent members with veto power the United States, Britain, Russia, China and France and 10 non-permanent members who serve two-year terms and have no power to veto resolutions.
The U.S. argues that Venezuela closely allied with Iran, Syria and Cuba would be a disruptive force. The campaign for a U.N. seat is shaping up to be a formidable diplomatic test for Chavez, gauging his ability to lobby head-to-head against the United States.
Chavez said the U.N. in its current system "doesn't work" and is "antidemocratic." He called for the world body to be overhauled, saying the U.S. government's "immoral veto" had allowed recent Israeli bombings of Lebanon to continue unabated for more than a month.
He also said it might be time to consider moving the U.N. headquarters out of New York: "Maybe a city of the south. We've proposed Venezuela."
The audience applauded at the end of Chavez's 23-minute speech. The Venezuelan has become Latin America's leading voice against the U.S. government, and his speech was reminiscent of crusading addresses by his mentor Fidel Castro of Cuba and the late Argentine revolutionary Ernesto "Che" Guevara.
But he reminded reporters that he respects the "noble" American people.
The United States continues to be the top buyer of Venezuelan oil, bringing the country billions of dollars (euros) in earnings that help fund Chavez's popular social programs. Accusing Bush of neglecting the poor, Chavez started a program last winter for Venezuela's U.S.-based oil company Citgo to sell discounted heating oil to poor American families.
It distributed more than 40 million gallons (151 million liters) of oil last winter to low-income Americans, and Chavez announced a doubling of that this winter.
He also weighed in other issues, saying Israel should return to Syria the disputed Golan Heights, which it seized in 1967.
The Mideast peace process was in the spotlight, with ministers from the Quartet that drafted the stalled road map the U.S., the U.N., the European Union and Russia meeting on the sidelines.
The delegates stressed the need for "a credible political process" to make progress toward the goal of two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. They also cited an "urgent need to make progress towards a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East."
The Security Council also was scheduled to hold a ministerial meeting Thursday that Arab leaders hope will help revive the Mideast peace process.
On Wednesday, Bush met with Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas and described him as "a man of peace" who can help move forward the stalled peace process.
Afghan President Hamid Karzai also warned that terrorism is rebounding in his country and said efforts to build democracy there had suffered setbacks over the past year as violence increased, especially in the volatile south where NATO forces have been battling Taliban militants in some of the fiercest battles since the hard-line government was toppled in 2001.
"We have seen terrorism rebounding as terrorists have infiltrated our borders to step up their murderous campaign against our people," he told the General Assembly.
He also expressed concern about "the increased incidents of Islamophobia in the West," saying it does not "bode well for the cause of building understanding and cooperation across civilizations."
The crisis in the ravaged Sudanese region of Darfur also was on the agenda Wednesday, with the African Union's Peace and Security Council meeting to discuss breaking the deadlock over a plan to replace an AU force with U.N. peacekeepers.
The bloc decided to extend the mandate of peacekeeping forces in Darfur through the end of the year, ensuring that international troops will remain for now in the war-torn Sudanese province.
The United Nations will provide material and logistic support to the mission, though Sudan is still resisting demands that the U.N. take over the mission from the AU, said Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaore, head of the AU Peace and Security Council.
Associated Press writers Edith M. Lederer and Kim Gamel at the United Nations contributed to this story.
 Load-Date: September 21, 2006

 

End of Document
