

Venezuela's Chavez calls Bush 'the devil' at U.N.
Associated Press International
September 21, 2006 Thursday 9:30 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 997 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez called U.S. President George W. Bush "the devil" in a fiery speech to the United Nations, but later reached out to an audience of Americans, saying he sees himself as a friend of the United States.
The leftist leader, long at odds with Washington, appeared to be making one of his boldest moves yet to coalesce international opposition to the Bush administration. Chavez began Wednesday's speech noting that Bush spoke from the same podium a day earlier.
"The devil came here," Chavez said. "Right here. Right here. And it smells of sulfur still today, this table that I am now standing in front of."
He then made the sign of the cross, brought his hands together as if praying and looked up to the ceiling.
Chavez's words drew tentative giggles at times from the audience, but also applause at the end of the speech and when he called Bush the devil.
He later spoke to hundreds of New Yorkers who filled a college hall Wednesday night, and drew a standing ovation when he said Bush committed genocide during the war in Iraq.
"The president of the United States should go before an international tribunal," Chavez said as applause filled the hall at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art. He compared the Bush administration's actions to those of the Nazis.
U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said earlier that Chavez's remarks in the United Nations were "not becoming for a head of state."
"I am not going to dignify a comment by the Venezuelan president to the president of the United States," Rice told reporters. The main U.S. seat in the United Nations was empty as Chavez spoke, though U.S. Ambassador John Bolton said a "junior note-taker" was present as is customary "when governments like that speak."
The Venezuelan has become Latin America's leading voice against the U.S. government, and his speeches were reminiscent of crusading addresses by his mentor Fidel Castro of Cuba and the late Argentine revolutionary Ernesto "Che" Guevara.
Chavez accused the U.S. of planning and financing a failed 2002 coup against him, a charge the U.S. denies. And he said the U.S. tries to impose its vision of democracy militarily in countries like Iran and Iraq.
He called U.S. consumerism "madness" at a marathon news conference, saying Americans have wasteful habits in using oil and energy. He held up a satellite photo showing the world at night, with bright light emanating from the U.S. and other wealthy countries.
The United States continues to be the top buyer of Venezuelan oil, bringing the South American country billions of dollars in earnings that help fund Chavez's popular social programs.
Accusing Bush of neglecting the poor, Chavez started a program last winter for Venezuela's U.S.-based oil company Citgo to sell discounted heating oil to poor American families. It distributed more than 40 million gallons of oil last winter to low-income Americans, and Chavez announced a doubling of that this winter.
"I'm not an enemy of the United States. I'm a friend of the United States... the people of the United States," Chavez said during his speech to the Americans, who included union organizers, professors and others. "They're two very different things you the people of the United States, and the government that's installed there."
He said he hopes Americans choose an "intelligent president" in the future.
Singer and activist Harry Belafonte introduced Chavez at the event, while former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark also attended, among supporters who waved Venezuelan flags and chanted Chavez's name. The Venezuelan leader signed autographs as a crowd rushed to him after the speech.
He also referred to his past threats that he could cut off oil exports to the U.S. if it tries to oust him.
"Believe me, if I were to decide tomorrow to stop sending oil to the United States ... the price would go up to US$150, US$200 (euro120, euro160) a barrel. But we don't want to do it, and we aren't going to do it," Chavez said. "We ask only for respect."
Chavez lambasted the U.S. government for trying to block Venezuela's campaign for a seat in the U.N. Security Council. He said if chosen over U.S.-favorite Guatemala in a secret-ballot U.N. vote next month, Venezuela would be "the voice of the Third World." The U.S. argues that Venezuela closely allied with Iran, Syria and Cuba would be a disruptive force.
He also said the U.N. in its current system "doesn't work" and is "antidemocratic." He called for the world body to be overhauled, saying the U.S. government's "immoral veto" had allowed recent Israeli bombings of Lebanon to continue unabated for more than a month.
Israel's foreign minister, meanwhile, warned on Wednesday that Iranian leaders pose the biggest threat to the world's values because they "speak proudly" of their wish to destroy Israel and pursue weapons to achieve that objective.
Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni said at the General Assembly session that the international community must stand up to Iran, which she claimed is pursuing the weapons to destroy Israel, a reference to its suspect nuclear program. Chavez, for one, has backed Iran's nuclear program, saying it has a right to peaceful nuclear energy.
Israel's issues with the Palestinians also were on the agenda. The Security Council was scheduled to hold a ministerial meeting Thursday that Arab leaders hope will help revive the peace process.
The African Union, meanwhile, said it will extend the mandate of a peacekeeping force in Darfur through Dec. 31, avoiding a showdown for now over Sudan's refusal to permit the United Nations to take over the mission.
Sudan's government vehemently opposes the introduction of U.N. forces in Darfur, where fighting between rebels and government-backed militias has killed more than 200,000 people and displaced 2.5 million since 2003. The U.N. has called it the world's worst humanitarian disaster.
Associated Press writers Edith M. Lederer, Nick Wadhams and Kim Gamel contributed to this story.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2006

 

End of Document
