

Venezuelan president Chavez meets with pope at the Vatican
Associated Press International
May 11, 2006 Thursday 11:47 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 408 words
Byline: By NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VATICAN CITY 
Body




Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez met Thursday with Pope Benedict XVI for talks on poverty and relations between the government and the Roman Catholic Church.
Aided by an interpreter, the two spoke privately for about 35 minutes in the Apostolic Palace. At the end of the encounter, the pope gave Chavez a copy of his encyclical, a papal medal as well as a letter, which witnesses said contained points the Vatican wanted to raise about particular concerns it has in Venezuela.
The church has been one of the most critical voices against the leftist leader, who has in turn called the church leadership a "tumor." Some Catholic leaders have expressed concern the president may be accumulating too much power.
The Venezuelan president has said repeatedly, however, that he wants good relations with the church.
Chavez often says Christ was a socialist and a revolutionary. He also regularly quotes from the Bible, particularly the passage that says it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter heaven.
"Our Bolivian revolution is very Christian and I have a friend who isn't Christian, but lately has said he is a Christian in the social aspect: his name is Fidel Castro," Chavez said Wednesday evening after arriving in Italy.
During the papal audience, Chavez, presented the pope with a portrait of South American independence leader Simon Bolivar. Chavez told the pope that Bolivar wasn't an atheist, as many believed, but a Christian. He cited a line from Bolivar's will, which was inscribed on the picture, in which Bolivar wrote that he was Catholic.
Before the talks, Chavez made clear he wanted to raise the issue of poverty in his meeting with the pontiff.
"First of all I will ask for his blessing, then I will talk about world poverty," Chavez was quoted as saying in Italian newspapers Corriere della Sera and La Repubblica on Thursday.
More than 90 percent of Venezuela's population is Roman Catholic, and church leaders and local priests wield tremendous influence over many of its citizens.
Chavez, who is on a visit to Europe and North Africa, met Wednesday with the Communist speaker of Italy's lower house of parliament, Fausto Bertinotti.
After the meeting, Chavez stressed the need to extend cooperation between Venezuela and Italy in the fight against poverty.
The Venezuelan leader's next stops are Vienna, Austria, for a summit of Latin American and European leaders, Britain, Libya and Algeria.
 Load-Date: May 12, 2006

 

End of Document
