

Villa and Alonso on the sidelines as Aragones plays safe with Spain lineup for Euro 2008 warmup
Associated Press International
May 28, 2008 Wednesday 9:09 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 433 words
Byline: By PAUL LOGOTHETIS, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: MADRID Spain
Body




David Villa and Xabi Alonso appear to be the odd men out with Spain coach Luis Aragones set to stick to his trusted lineup for the European Championship warmup match against Peru.
The likely starters for Saturday's friendly practiced Wednesday afternoon in Aragones' favored 4-1-4-1 formation, which leaves a single striker up front and a crowded midfield to generate the offense.
Fernando Torres, coming off a 33-goal season at Liverpool, is likely to get the nod ahead of his Valencia counterpart Villa, while Villarreal midfielder Marco Senna will assume the defensive midfielder's role instead of Alonso.
Arsenal midfielder Cesc Fabregas will also start and carry the offensive expectations starting with Peru.
"Luis has given me an opportunity and if he gives me minutes I have to take advantage of them with the intention to play them like I do with my team," Fabregas told Radio Marca. "You have to play in your position with the same patience you normally do."
Spain, whose 1964 European Championship win represents its sole major trophy, is looking to rebound from a disappointing World Cup in Germany two years ago when it was eliminated by finalist France at the first knockout stage. Fourth-ranked Spain remains a favorite at the June 7-29 tournament alongside Germany, Italy, France and Portugal.
The Peru match is one of two warmups before Spain opens Euro 2008 against Russia on June 10. It plays the United States in the northern coastal city of Santander on June 4. Sweden and defending champion Greece are also in Spain's group.
Torres' scoring record for the national team hasn't been so productive as his club form, with 15 goals in 47 matches. Villa has scored 13 in 30.
FC Barcelona pair Andres Iniesta and Xavi Hernandez and Valencia winger David Silva will join Fabregas in midfield.
Spain hasn't lost since November 2006 a stretch of 14 games while mainly using the 4-1-4-1 formation. It beat World Cup champion Italy and France during the current run.
"Right now our strength is possession. At dead ball moments, it's not our strength but we can overcome this," Villarreal defender Joan Capdevilla told reporters.
Several hundred fans cheered the team at the team's Las Rozas training ground as it completed the first full day of training since the players joined up on Monday. Another double training session is expected Thursday before the team travels to Huelva on Friday.
In defense, Capdevilla should start on the left, along with Real Madrid's Sergio Ramos on the right, and Barcelona captain Carles Puyol and Carlos Marchena of Valencia will be in front of goalkeeper Iker Casillas.
 Load-Date: May 29, 2008

 

End of Document
