

Water privatization loses ground, but big dams all the rage at water summit
Associated Press International
March 21, 2006 Tuesday 10:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 863 words
Byline: By MARK STEVENSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY 
Body




Violent protests have driven corporations away from making the investments needed to improve municipal water systems so that desperately needed tap water can be provided in developing nations.
So now the world's poor buy bottled drinking water instead from Coke, Pepsi and other multinational companies.
"Water is not for sale," chanted the demonstrators who rattled money inside plastic bottles at the World Water Forum.
But they couldn't be more wrong private companies make much more money selling bottled water than they ever did developing public water systems. And big infrastructure projects aren't going away corporations also stand to benefit from a renewed push to build massive hydroelectric dams in the Third World.
So even though just about everybody, from CEOs to aid workers, spoke out against the privatization of water at the 4th World Water Forum ending Wednesday, the apparent victory for anti-corporate forces may prove hollow.
"Nobody is talking about privatizing a resource," said Mexico's Environment Secretary, Jose Luis Luege. "That is something inalienable, sovereign."
But water is also a very big business.
Multinationals Pepsi, Cadbury, Nestle, Danone and Coca Cola supply most of the bottled water in Mexico, now the world's second-largest consumer.
Sales of bottled water in China jumped by more than 250 percent between 1999 and 2004. They tripled in India and almost doubled in Indonesia, according to a study released by the Earth Policy Institute, a private, Washington-based environmental group. In many developing countries bottled water is used because the tap water is so bad, people are loath to use it.
Worldwide, the bottled water industry is now worth about US$100 billion (euro82 billion) per year.
In the 1990s, private firms jumped into the municipal water business by gobbling up public water systems and raising rates. But angry protests followed, and governments proved reluctant or incapable of forcing poor citizens to pay more, especially to foreign water companies.
That's especially true in Bolivia, where demonstrations in 2004 in the slum city of El Alto, outside La Paz, forced a subsidiary of French Suez Corp. to cancel its water contract. Several years earlier, a separate water and sewer contract by Bechtel Corp. in the Bolivian city of Cochabamba was canceled by the Bolivian government after violent protests over increased rates.
One of the El Alto protest leaders Abel Mamani was recently appointed Bolivia's water minister, and Suez is expected to make "an orderly exit" from the country under threat of government audits by April, said government water adviser Pablo Solon.
"Let's be realistic. We don't think any private company is going to invest in Bolivia in the water sector anymore," Solon said. "What's more, it's logical that they shouldn't."
Gerard Payen, who heads an association of private water companies, said companies are reasonably cautious because governments have used them as scapegoats for rate increases that were planned well before the contracts were signed.
While major construction and engineering firms and the World Bank now leave retail water delivery to the soda companies, they're still looking for opportunities in the developing world and thinking much, much bigger. Activists say developing countries are being pushed hard to build big dams and hydroelectric projects.
Bechtel, for example, may be one of the bidders for the La Parota project, which would contain the Papagayo River to provide more water for the Mexican Pacific resort of Acapulco.
On Tuesday, about 30 farmers, some wearing machetes, barged in on a ceremony in Acapulco being attended by the mayor and Guerrero state governor, demanding the La Parota project be shelved. The protesters yelled "death to the governor!" before being detained by authorities. Farmers say they will lose their land to the project.
Despite strong opposition, construction of the dam is scheduled to start by 2007.
"There is a huge amount of money there, about US$1 billion (euro0.82 billion), and of course the corporate interests are very much involved," said Patrick McCully, director of the International River Network, an environmental group.
Hardly a presentation went by at the water forum without the World Bank touting its campaign for a "minimum platform of water infrastructure" for every country meaning, in most cases, big dams. Bank officials invoked a powerful, if frightening, argument: climate change and global warming are going to make dams necessary for flood control and drought protection.
"Investment in hydroelectric infrastructure is not a choice anymore for Africa. It is a must," said Jamal Shagir, the World Bank's director of water and energy.
Perhaps the only thing everybody from aid workers to water-company executives agreed on are concepts like "multi-stakeholder processes" and "integrated water resource management." Put simply, the terms mean consulting everyone involved before a dam or other project is built, and taking into account all the environmental, economic and social effects during the design stage.
A draft of the final declaration by 78 water ministers attending the summit strongly endorsed both approaches.
 Load-Date: March 22, 2006

 

End of Document
