

WHO announces the 13 candidates to become next global health chief
Associated Press International
September 6, 2006 Wednesday 6:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 468 words
Byline: By ELIANE ENGELER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA 
Body




French politician Bernard Kouchner, bird flu expert Margaret Chan and Ecuadorean president Alfredo Palacio Gonzalez were among the 13 nominees named Wednesday as candidates to head the World Health Organization.
The U.N. agency which is in the process of selecting a successor to Lee Jong-wook, who died in May two years before the end of his term said it would decide on a new director-general at a special session of the agency's governing World Health Assembly on Nov. 9.
Before that, a shortlist of five candidates will be named by WHO's executive board, which will interview them and then decide only one final candidate to propose to the assembly.
The other candidates include: Kazem Behbehani, a senior WHO official from Kuwait; Julio Frenk, Mexico's health minister; David A. Gunnarsson, Iceland's health minister; Nay Htun, former high-ranking U.N. development and environment official from Myanmar; Karam Karam, former Lebanese health minister; Elena Salgado Mendez, Spain's health minister; Manuel Mocumbi, former prime minister of Mozambique; Shigero Omi, a Japanese who heads WHO's operations in the Western Pacific and China; Pekka Puska, head of Finland's national health institute; and Tomris Turmen, a Turkish woman who heads WHO's family health division.
Acting director-general Anders Nordstrom will continue in the position until the new chief is elected.
With the increase of global health threats, such as SARS, HIV/AIDS and bird flu, the position of WHO director-general has become increasingly important.
Lee took over as head of the agency in 2003 after working for the agency for over two decades in a variety of posts, including as head of its tuberculosis program.
He began as WHO was stepping up its battle against the SARS outbreak, and spent much of his three years in office urging countries to prepare themselves for the possibility of an influenza pandemic caused by the bird flu virus.
The H5N1 strain of bird flu has killed at least 141 people, mostly in Asia.
Bernard Kouchner, a physician, founded the nonprofit Doctors Without Borders, which sends volunteer medical personnel to underdeveloped countries and other trouble spots around the world. He was France's health minister in the 1990s before acting as the first U.N. administrator in Kosovo.
Margaret Chan is representative of the WHO director-general for Pandemic Influenza as well as assistant director-general for communicable diseases. After managing the outbreak of SARS, the Chinese physician is now assisting governments in the preparation for a possible flu pandemic. Before joining WHO in 2003, Chan was Hong Kong's health director.
Ecuador's outgoing president Alfredo Palacio Gonzalez, a former health minister and vice president, Palacio is a cardiologist by profession. His presidential term ends early next year.
 Load-Date: September 7, 2006

 

End of Document
