

Who will call the shots at last-chance GM?
Associated Press International
March 30, 2009 Monday 11:12 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 806 words
Byline: By TOM KRISHER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DETROIT 
Body




The 25-year company veteran who inherits the fate of General Motors is known as someone quick to act. It remains to be seen, though, how much he'll be allowed to do.
Fritz Henderson assumes control of the ailing automaker as members of the White House auto task force prepare to move into GM's Detroit headquarters themselves to ensure GM makes the changes demanded by the Obama administration.
Henderson, the 50-year-old former chief operating officer tapped to be CEO after the White House forced Rick Wagoner to resign, said Monday he thinks he, not the task force, will handle everyday management.
But industry analysts and management professors say it may not be so simple now that the government has assumed an unprecedented role in restructuring GM and its crosstown rival Chrysler.
"The lender will always come in and push levers of corporate control," said Douglas Baird, a professor who specializes in bankruptcy at the University of Chicago Law School.
"It will basically say: 'You want me to lend money. But there are these kind of targets you have to hit.' Private lenders do it all the time," he added.
President Barack Obama, in detailing his plans for the industry Monday, said the government has no interest in running GM. But at the same time, the White House has specifically rejected a restructuring plan turned in by GM and ordered it to make deeper cuts.
"What we are interested in is giving GM an opportunity to finally make those much-needed changes that will let them emerge from this crisis a stronger and more competitive company," Obama said.
GM and Chrysler are alive today only because of $17.4 billion in government loans. The pair have requested a total of $21.6 billion more, but the government says they haven't met the conditions of what they've already borrowed.
But Washington does see potential. The government is giving GM enough money to stay running for 60 days while it tries to cut its debt. Chrysler is getting only 30, and will be sold off if it can't find a partner.
Henderson, whose first name is Frederick but who goes by Fritz, pitched for the University of Michigan baseball team in college, earned a master's degree in business administration from Harvard in 1984 and joined GM as an analyst that year.
He has held posts at the company's financing arm and its auto parts division and led GM operations in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and Europe. He was named chief financial officer in 2006 and chief operating officer last year.
Wagoner, who was CEO for nearly nine years, was criticized for not moving quickly enough to restructure the bureaucratic GM. David Cole, chairman of the Center for Automotive Research, who knows both men, said Henderson will speed things up.
"Fritz, I think, is a little bit more decisive," Cole said. "As a consequence of that, I think he can move a little bit more quickly."
GM's outgoing vice chairman, Bob Lutz, said in an e-mail that Henderson "listens, discusses, cuts the talk off at the right point, decides and acts."
In his conference call with reporters, Henderson said he will focus on cleaning up GM's balance sheet and cutting its debt so the company can repay taxpayers.
"I don't think you're going to see the task force making day-to-day decisions," Henderson said.
He told reporters that in addition to his former role to keep the company managing how it makes cars and trucks, he will move more quickly than Wagoner on the restructuring.
"It's about doing more, doing it faster and doing whatever it takes," he said.
But some worry the White House task force will be too involved in the company's daily operations.
"They are going to write the plan for GM. They are going to decide what GM will look like," said Republican Sen. Bob Corker, who has been critical of the auto bailout.
Corker said he spoke to Steven Rattner, chairman of the Obama task force, late Sunday and was told the administration might use a section of the bankruptcy code to conduct a quick restructuring and decide which plants will stay alive.
"I was certainly quite alarmed to hear what their role in the next 60 days was going to be," Corker said.
Henderson seemed warm to the idea of a "surgical bankruptcy" because the government said it would provide financing and guarantee the warranties of both GM and Chrysler cars starting Monday. But he said he still would prefer to restructure out of court.
GM has so far failed to persuade creditors to lower the amount of debt they hold in exchange for equity stakes in the company. And GM and Chrysler both still have to try to persuade the United Auto Workers to accept equity stakes in the companies instead of some of the cash the automakers were supposed to pay into trust funds for retiree health care.
AP Auto Writer Dan Strumpf in New York and Associated Press Writer Ken Thomas in Washington, D.C., contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: March 31, 2009

 

End of Document
