

WORLD CUP 2006: Portugal's Parliament bows to pressure of watching the World Cup
Associated Press International
May 30, 2006 Tuesday 9:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 777 words
Byline: By CHRIS LEHOURITES, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Lawmakers in Portugal's parliament have accepted the inevitable.
Fearing absences that are common when important soccer games are televised, deputies have agreed to change the times of their regular sessions to make way for Portugal's World Cup match against Mexico on June 21.
The match, which is the last in Group D for the two teams, is scheduled to kick off at 3 p.m. local time.
A plenary session scheduled for that afternoon was moved to 10 a.m., and committee meetings were put off until after the game finishes.
Portugal's other group games, against Angola and Iran, do not clash with scheduled parliamentary sessions.
RAH RAH: Germany's national soccer team has a good chance to win the World Cup. At least it does if University of Wolverhampton professor Alan Nevill is correct.
Nevill recently conducted a study that showed crowds affect refereeing decisions, making home-field advantage a huge bonus for the hosts at the World Cup.
Soccer fans agreed. A survey of 2,517 fans in England by The Football Fans Census found that 98 percent of those asked agreed that referees can be influenced by crowds.
Nevill's study suggested that whenever a player for the home team commits a foul, the crowd's reaction can activate the "potent stressor," which can increase the level of uncertainty or indecision of a referee.
Germany, which is in Group A with Costa Rica, Poland and Ecuador, is considered to have an outside chance to win its fourth World Cup title. But maybe a little support from the home fans will make all the difference.
KNOW THE NATIONS: Soccer fans heading to the World Cup know that Brazil is the favorite and teams such as the Netherlands, Argentina, England, Italy and Germany will be looking to unseat the defending champions.
But fewer people probably are aware that Costa Rica is a great place to visit for adventurer-seeking tourists, Croatian beaches are some of the nicest in Europe and the national dish in Ecuador is roast guinea pig.
You can find all that information in Thomas Cook's World Cup guide, "Know the Score."
The guidebook is available for free in all Thomas Cook stores and on the company's Web site, thomascook.com.
FAMILY AFFAIR: Croatia will head into the World Cup with two sets of brothers and a father-son combination.
Robert and Niko Kovac, and Ivan and Jerko Leko all were selected to play for Croatia by coach Zlatko Kranjcar. The coach also picked his son, Niko.
Switzerland also has a pair of brothers, twins Philipp and David Degen. They will be the fifth set of twins to compete at the World Cup, according to FIFA.
Because of a late roster change, Serbia-Montenegro will also head into the tournament with a set of relatives. Coach Ilija Petkovic recently called up his son Dusan to replace the injured Mirko Vucinic.
HOME-GROWN TALENT: Italy and Saudi Arabia both will be represented by 23 players that play their club soccer at home.
Ivory Coast, however, is the only team at the World Cup that will have a roster made up exclusively of players who don't play professionally in their own country.
According to FIFA, 47 percent of the registered players compete in England, Italy, Spain, France or Germany the top five leagues in Europe. The English Premier League has 102 players chosen for their national teams.
VACANCY: If you're in Germany and don't have a place to stay, fanproject2006 may be able to help.
The group said it will provide accommodations for more than 250,000 fans at the monthlong tournament. It will also offer bus shuttles to and from some games, as well as nightly parties and concerts.
"We started fanproject2006 not only to solve the housing problem, but to also give fans a place to eat, sleep, drink and have the experience of a lifetime," said Ulrich Kramer, the group's CEO. "The fans will come for the football, but they are going to stay for the party."
Fan Project also said it will broadcast games on large-screen televisions for fans who don't have match tickets.
"We want all football fans to be a part of this," Kramer said. "At fanproject2006, you don't need a ticket, all you need is the love of the game."
BALL INSCRIPTION: All 960 soccer balls to be available for use at the World Cup will be inscribed with the date, the names of the teams playing, the venue and the match number.
Each of the 64 games at this year's tournament will have 15 balls ready for use.
After the game, each team will get to keep one of the Adidas-made balls, named "Teamgeist Berlin." The organizing committee, FIFA and the match officials also will receive one as a souvenir.
Adidas also will supply each of the 32 World Cup teams with 40 balls for training, but those balls will not carry any special inscription.
 Load-Date: May 31, 2006

 

End of Document
