

Yet again, the people of Beirut adapt to the rhythm of war
Associated Press International
August 8, 2006 Tuesday 1:43 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 795 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT Lebanon
Body




Nearly 1,500 years ago, an earthquake triggered a tsunami that pummeled ancient Beirut. In the centuries that followed, a series of armies and empires Arab Muslims, Crusaders, Mamluks, Ottomans, French colonizers imposed their rule on the Mediterranean city and trading hub.
A 15-year civil war turned the city into a battleground until 1990, and now the powerful Israeli military is pounding key Lebanese infrastructure and guerrilla positions in its fight against Hezbollah militants.
Beirut, again, is in the line of fire.
No wonder some tourist pamphlets call it "the city that would not die."
In times of peace, Beirut flourishes. Before fighting erupted on July 12, the city had recovered its reputation throughout the Arab world and beyond for its beach fronts and boutiques, its international cuisine and cosmopolitan flair. Now the old image of Beirut a place of bombs, death and displaced people on the move is back.
As with conflicts across the globe, the truth on the ground is far from black and white. On Monday, it was hard to tell that a war was on for a visitor strolling down the city's famed Hamra Street, a shopping thoroughfare near the American University of Beirut that is known to travelers across the Middle East.
The Starbucks coffee shop was closed, but most of the tables were occupied at Wimpy's, a diner where Israeli soldiers were shot in 1982, an attack that symbolized Israel's souring involvement in Lebanon's civil war. An upscale store selling ceramic tiles was shut, but a bookstore selling a 2004 novel "It's Time to Return to Lebanon" was open.
The book title refers to the huge Lebanese diaspora, a legacy of fighting over the decades that forced many people to emigrate, some as far away as Brazil and Australia, and deprived the country of a desperately needed pool of talent.
Once again, vast tracts of Beirut stand virtually empty, their residents transformed into refugees. Some fled by boat to Cyprus or overland to neighboring Syria, while others sheltered in northern parts of Lebanon that are considered safe.
Hundreds of civilians have died in airstrikes on vehicles and villages in southern Lebanon, but Israel says its bombing is selective, concentrated on Hezbollah installations near its border and the Islamic group's stronghold on Beirut's southern edges and in the Bekaa Valley.
But the people on Hamra Street and in many other areas of Beirut, particularly Christian areas with no allegiance to Hezbollah, go about their business in relative safety, though occasional booms in the distance serve as reminders of war.
The shopkeepers aren't making much money. "We have no choice but to open," the owner of a sports store said. Yellow tape seals off empty gasoline stations, traffic is scarce on the highways, and seaside hotels and amusement parks stand idle and shuttered.
A symbol of Beirut's stylish resilience in times of trouble, the Summerland Hotel, was torn down a year ago for renovations that do not seem imminent. The Summerland, which opened in 1979, had huge fuel tanks so it could operate even if fighting shut down the city's electricity system, and employed a large security force to fend off any gunmen with ill intent.
One of the few pockets of nightlife in Beirut is Gouraud Street, where taxis wait for revelers at closing time around midnight. Torino Express, a hip, dimly lit, tightly packed place, stays open an extra hour. On Sunday night, the DJ played melancholic British pop from the early 1980s and a bartender announced the call for last rounds: "Beer? Check? Beer? Check?"
Around town, posters for a June 10 concert in Beirut by the American rapper 50 Cent still cling to walls, a memento of Beirut's reputation as a party town before the fighting.
The jewel of Lebanon's rebirth after the civil war was the renovated part of downtown Beirut near Parliament, where elegant apartment buildings, banks and shops sit next to parks, squares and excavated Roman baths. The war-torn area was rebuilt by Solidere, a company founded by former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who was assassinated last year.
Israeli warplanes have spared downtown Beirut. A clock tower that once drew vacationing families is now surrounded by mounted, graphic photographs of children maimed, burned or killed in Israeli airstrikes on Qana in southern Lebanon, and other areas. Israel said the July 30 attack in Qana was a mistake, but accused Hezbollah of shielding rocket-launching sites behind civilians.
Lebanese soldiers and police are periodically deployed in central Beirut, but not in response to Israeli attacks. They provide security for the flow of dignitaries come to discuss the crisis. A black hearse broke down on a main road, and two soldiers in camouflage uniforms joined the driver in tinkering with the engine.
ct/srh
 Load-Date: August 9, 2006

 

End of Document
