

Zidane nominated for FIFA Player of the Year award
Associated Press International
October 12, 2006 Thursday 2:44 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 683 words
Dateline: ZURICH Switzerland
Body




Zinedine Zidane was among those nominated for this year's FIFA World Player of the Year award, despite ending his career by being ejected from France's World Cup final loss to Italy for head butting Marco Materazzi in the chest.
Italians Fabio Cannavaro and Andrea Pirlo, who were named the World Cup's best players along with Zidane, were also nominated for the FIFA award. They will have to beat Brazil's Ronaldinho, the winner the last two years.
FIFA on Thursday released its shortlist of 20 women and 30 men in contention for the two annual awards honoring the best players in the sport.
Soccer's world governing body will announce the three male and three female players with the most votes in early December. The winners then will be chosen from those finalists and presented with the awards at the 16th FIFA World Player Gala on Dec. 18, at the Zurich Opera House.
Last year, Barcelona striker Ronaldinho beat out England's Frank Lampard and Cameroon's Samuel Eto'o, while repeat winner Birgit Prinz of Germany edged Marta of Brazil and Shannon Boxx of the United States.
The men's shortlist includes Thierry Henry, twice second in the voting and now within three goals of Michel Platini's French national team record of 41, as well as Germany captain Michael Ballack, World Cup-winning goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon and young England star Wayne Rooney.
Brazilian striker Ronaldo is also nominated. He is tied with Zidane for the most awards at three.
Several players were nominated from the Italy team that captured its fourth World Cup title in a penalty shootout after a 1-1 tie with France.
But the final will always be remembered for Zidane's head butt to Materazzi's chest in retaliation for the Italian defender's verbal insults.
Zidane drew a red card in overtime for the foul. Even though he retired afterward, FIFA handed him a three-game ban and a fine of US$6,000 (euro4,800). He agreed to serve the suspension by doing community service with children.
There will be a new winner of the women's award as Prinz was left off the shortlist this year, despite earning the women's award as best player in Germany for the sixth straight year.
Marta headlines the shortlist, along with Americans Kristine Lilly and Abby Wambach, as well as China's Ma Xiaoxu, who was named the best player and finished as top scorer at the under-20 women's world soccer championship in Russia last month.
This year's shortlist was drawn up by international experts on FIFA's different committees.
Like the last two years, the coaches and captains of men's and women's national teams around the world will be eligible to vote, FIFA said. They have all received the player lists and will have several weeks to submit their votes.
FIFA will also present the Presidential Award and the Fair Play Award for 2006 at the gala.
Men's shortlist: Adriano (Brazil), Michael Ballack (Germany), Gianluigi Buffon (Italy), Fabio Cannavaro (Italy), Cristiano Ronaldo (Portugal), Petr Cech (Czech Republic), Deco (Portugal), Didier Drogba (Cote d'Ivoire), Michael Essien (Ghana), Samuel Eto'o (Cameroon), Luis Figo (Portugal), Gennaro Gattuso (Italy), Steven Gerrard (England), Thierry Henry (France), Kaka (Brazil), Miroslav Klose (Germany), Philipp Lahm (Germany), Frank Lampard (England), Jens Lehmann (Germany), Alessandro Nesta (Italy), Andrea Pirlo (Italy), Franck Ribery (France), Juan Roman Riquelme (Argentina), Ronaldinho (Brazil), Wayne Rooney (England), Tomas Rosicky (Czech Republic), Andriy Shevchenko (Ukraine), Lilian Thuram (France), Patrick Viera (France), Zinedine Zidane (France).
Women's shortlist: Laura Georges (France), Duan Han (China), Laura Kalmari (Finland), Kristine Lilly (United States), Renate Lingor (Germany), Xiaoxu Ma (China), Marta (Brazil), Malin Mostrom (Sweden), Monica Ocampo (Mexico), Cathrine Paaske Sorensen (Denmark), Kum Suk Ri (South Korea), Silke Rottenberg (Germany), Cheryl Salisbury (Australia), Lotta Schelin (Sweden), Christine Sinclair (Canada), Kelly Smith (England), Sandrine Soubeyrand (France), Ingvild Stensland (Norway), Cynthia Uwak (Nigeria), Abby Wambach (United States).
(eb-bsk)
 Load-Date: October 13, 2006

 

End of Document
