

Zidane on shortlist for FIFA Player of the Year award
Associated Press International
October 12, 2006 Thursday 3:37 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 353 words
Dateline: ZURICH Switzerland
Body




Zinedine Zidane was among those nominated for this year's FIFA World Player of the Year award.
The former captain of France made the shortlist despite ending his career being ejected from the World Cup final against Italy for head butting Marco Materazzi in the chest.
Italians Fabio Cannavaro and Andrea Pirlo, who were named the World Cup's best players along with Zidane, were also nominated for the award. They will have to beat Brazil's Ronaldinho, the winner for the last two years.
FIFA on Thursday released its shortlists of 20 women and 30 men in contention for the two annual awards honoring the best players in the sport.
Coaches and captains of men's and women's national teams around the world will be eligible to vote, and soccer's world governing body will announce the three male and three female players with the most votes in early December.
The winners then will be chosen from those finalists and presented with the awards at the Zurich Opera House on Dec. 18.
Last year, FC Barcelona striker Ronaldinho beat out England's Frank Lampard and Cameroon's Samuel Eto'o, while repeat winner Birgit Prinz of Germany edged Marta of Brazil and Shannon Boxx of the United States in the women's.
The men's shortlist includes Thierry Henry, twice second in the voting and now within three goals of Michel Platini's French national team record of 41 goals.
Germany captain Michael Ballack, World Cup-winning goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon and England's Wayne Rooney also made the shortlist.
Several players were nominated from the Italy team that captured its fourth World Cup title in a penalty shootout after a 1-1 draw with France.
There will be a new winner of the women's award as Prinz was left off the shortlist this year, despite earning the women's award as best player in Germany for the sixth straight year.
Marta is in the shortlist, along with Americans Kristine Lilly and Abby Wambach, as well as China's Ma Xiaoxu top scorer and named the best player at the under-20 women's world soccer championship in Russia last month.
This year's shortlist was drawn up by international experts on FIFA's different committees.
 Load-Date: October 13, 2006

 

End of Document
